---
layout: post
title: Permutations and Combinations with repetition
tags: Permutations Combinations Backtracking
---

Generating permutations of a given set of objects is a well researched problem with numerous solutions. Here we take a look at a simple function which can generate permutations and combinations with and without repetition.

To handle both cases (with and without repetition) uniformly we define a structure which holds an element (an integer for simplicity) and its frequency. The frequency denotes how many times the element can be used in a given arrangement (either a permutation or a combination).

<div class="code-block">
<pre> <code>
		typedef struct frequency
		{
			int item;
			int count;
		} frequency_t
</code> </pre>
</div>

Given an array of the above structure, the following function prints out either permutations or combinations depending on the boolean value passed in for the parameter "permute".

<div class="code-block">
<pre> <code>
		/*
		backtracking function to either print permutations or combinations (with repetition) of numbers
		f:	pointer to the array of frequency_t. A frequency_t consists of an item and its frequency
		fsize:	size of the array f points to
		x:	pointer to an array which is used to store the generated arrangement
		i:	index into the array x where the next element will be written
		N:	how many elements to choose. i.e. nPr or nCr N=r and fsize=n
		permute:if true permutations are generated, else combinations are generated
		*/
		void arrange(frequency_t *f, int fsize, int *x, int i, int N, bool permute)
		{
			//basic parameter validation
			if(f == NULL || fsize <= 0 || x == NULL || i < 0 || N <= 0) return;

			//we have an arrangement to be printed
			if(i == N)
			{
				printarrangement(x, i);
				return;
			}

			//backtracking
			for(int j = 0; j < fsize; ++j)
			{
				if(f[j].count <= 0) continue;
		
				x[i] = f[j].item;
				--f[j].count;

				permute ?
				arrange(f, fsize, x, i + 1, N, permute) :
				arrange(f + j, fsize - j, x, i + 1, N, permute);
		
				++f[j].count;
			}
		}
</code> </pre>
</div>

The idea behind the above implementation is very simple. Iterate through the array of frequency_t elements, and if the frequency of an element is greater than zero, then the element becomes a candidate in the arrangement to be printed. Once an element is used, its frequency is decremented before the recursive call, and incremented after return from the recursive call.
